# TD1/9: Use basic Linux commands

# Exercise 1: Move around

## 1. Go to the root directory
cd 

## 2. Display the content of the current (root) directory
ls

## 3. Check your current location
pwd

## 4. Try to create a directory named test
mkdir test

## 5. Go to the general home directory (should contain folders named after each user)
cd /home

## 6. Go to your home directory
cd ~

## 7. Go back to the general home directory (located "just above")
cd ..

## 8. Go again "just above", you should be back to the root directory
cd ..

## 9. Go directly to your home directory (named after you). It should be a very simple command, which take no name as parameter of the path
cd

## 10. Try to create a directory named test
mkdir test

## 11. Go into this new directory
cd test

## 12. Check your current location 
pwd


# Exercise 2: Create, Rename, copy, delete

## 1. Go to your home directory (should be named after you, you might be there by default)
cd val

## 2. Check your current location
pwd

## 3. Create a folder linux_ex_1
mkdir linux_ex_1

## 4. Go into this folder
cd linux_ex_1

## 5. Create an empty text file named [first_name]_[last_name].txt 
vim val.txt

## 6. Create a folder notes
mkdir notes

## 7. Move your text file into this folder
mv val.txt notes/

## 8. Rename the text file by appending the current year james_gnansia_2023.txt
mv val.txt val_2023.txt

## 9. Make a copy of this folder, name it notes_2022
cp -r notes/ notes_2022

## 10. Delete the first folder (notes) using the verbose option
rm -rv notes

# Exercise 3: Create and run a script
## 1. Create a script script_1.sh in the folder linux_ex_1
vim script_1.sh

## 2. In the script, write the commands that would output the following:
##    Script running please wait ...
##    Done.
echo "Script running please wait ..."
echo "Done."

## 3. Quit editing and save the script

## 4. Display the content of the script (using a command, not from an editor)
cat script_1.sh

## 5. Run the script
source script_1.sh

# Exercise 4: Accessing or modifying a file : permissions and root privilege
# Exercise 4:.1 Change the rights for accessing or modifying a file
## 1. Create a file credentials in the folder linux_ex_1
vim credentials

## (a) Write any kind of (fake) personal information within the file
Lionel Messi is a fraud
## (b) Display the file content
cat credentials
## (c) Display the current permissions
ls -l credentials

## 2. Change the current permissions to : read only for all users
chmod a-w credentials
## (a) Display the new permissions
ls -l credentials
## (b) Modify and save the file
vim credentials
## (c) Display the file content
cat credentials
## 3. Change the permissions back to read and write for all users
chmod a+rw credentials
## (a) Display the new permissions
ls -l credentials
## (b) Modify and save the file
vim credentials
## (c) Display the file content
cat credentials

## On the same file :
## 1. Add the execute permission to the owner
chmod u+x credentials.sh
## (a) Display the new permissions
ls -l credentials.sh
## 2. Remove the read permission to other users
chmod o-r credentials.sh
## (a) Display the new permissions
ls -l credentials.sh
## 3. Change the permissions to read, write and execute for all users
chmod a+rwx credentials.sh
## (a) Display the new permissions
ls -l credentials.sh

# Exercise 4:.2 Access root files
## 1. Go to the root folder
cd
## 2. Create a file in root user mode named .private_file
touch .private_file
## (a) Write some information in the file
sudo vim .private_file
## (b) Display the file content
sudo cat .private_file
## (c) Display all the files in the folder including hidden files
ls -a
## 3. Modify the file in normal user mode
## (a) Write some new information in the file
## (b) Display the file content
Impossible
## 4. Modify the file in root user mode
## (a) Write some new information in the file
sudo -i vim .private_file i Modified
(b) Display the file content
cat private_file
## 5. Change permissions to read, write and execute for all users
## (a) Modify the file content in normal user mode
vim .private_file
## (b) Display the file content
cat .private_file

# Exercise 4:.3 Change a file owner
## 1. Change permissions of .private_file to read and write for all users, in normal user mode
chmod a+rw .private_file
## 2. Set the new file owner as the current user
sudo chown $USER .private_file
## 3. Change permissions of .private_file to read and write for all users, in normal user mode
chmod a+rw .private_file

# Exercise 4:.4 Manage Packages (tools / functions)
## 1. Update your main package manager named apt
sudo apt update
## 2. Upgrade apt
sudo apt upgrade apt
## 3. Install the package cmatrix
sudo apt install cmatrix
## 4. Launch cmatrix
cmatrix
## 5. Quit cmatrix
CTRL + C
## 6. Install the package tmux
sudo apt install tmux
## 7. Launch tmux 
tmux
## 8. Say "Hello session 0" using bash in your current tmux session
echo "Hello session 0"
## 9. Launch cmatrix in your current tmux session
cmatrix
## 10. Detach from the current tmux session (without stopping cmatrix)
CTRL B + D
## 11. Create a new tmux session
tmux new -s mysession
## 12. Say "Hello session 1" using bash in your new tmux session
echo "Hello session 1"
## 13. Detach from the current tmux session
CTRL B + D
## 14. List all running sessions
tmux ls
## 15. Attach again to session 0
tmux attach-session -t 0
## 16. Detach again
CTRL B + D
## 17. Attach again to session 1
tmux attach-session -t mysession
## 18. Detach again
CTRL B + D
## 19. List all running sessions
tmux ls
## 20. Kill all tmux sessions and quit tmux
tmux kill-server
## 21. List all sessions
tmux ls




















