# TD2/9: Fundamental Linux functionalities
# Exercise 1: Access general computer informations
## 1. Put system up to date
sudo apt-get update && sudo apt-get upgrade
## 2. Display
— Linux version : uname -r
— Current processes and memory usage associated : top
— Display it in a more pleasant way ("more readable for humans") : vmstat
— Number of processors : nproc
— L1, L2 and L3 cache size : lcspu
— Disk space : df
— Monted devices : mount
— Connected usb devices : lsblk
— Hostname : hostname

# Exercise 2: Shell - Variables and scripts scope
## 1. Create a variable x and assign it the short text piri pimpin
x = "piri pimpin"
## 2. Display the value of this variable
echo $x
## 3. Add to this value the following text piri pimpon
## It should contain the following : piri pimpim piri pimpon
x+=" piri pimpon"
## 4. Create a folder named my_programs, then enter into that folder
mkdir my_programs
cd my_programs
## 5. Create a script named pilou that displays pilou pilou
echo "pilou pilou" > pilou
## 6. Run this script
cat pilou
## 7. Make this script executable
chmod +x pilou
## 8. Run the script by writting its name only
./pilou
## 9. Programs called from the terminal are usually found thanks to a variable named PATH
## Display the content of the variable PATH
echo $PATH
## 10. Add the path of your current location to the global variable PATH
PATH=$PATH:$(pwd)
## 11. When you are sure of the result, export it
export PATH
## 12. Go to your home directory
cd ~
## 13. Run your script by writting its name only
pilou
## 14. Change the value of the PATH in the .profile file in order to make it
PATH=$PATH:/path/to/my_programs
## 15. Create a new shell and run your script using its name only
pilou

# Exercise 3: Scheduling task - daemon
## 1. Create a script say_hello.sh
vim say_hello.sh
— Make it write the current date and time followed by ’Hello’
echo "$(date) - Hello"
— It should write it in a file named ’hellos.txt’
$HOME/my_programs/hellos.txt
— Each new output should be appened to the file (it shouldn’t remove
previous hellos)
## 2. Make the script executable
chmod +x say_hello.sh
3. Use crontab to schedule the running of the script every minute 
crontab -e
* * * * * ~/my_programs/say_hello.sh

# Exercise 4: Hashing
## 1. Create a folder named hash_checksum. Go into this folder
mkdir hash_checksum
cd hash_checksum
## 2. Inside this folder, create two files named .sensible_addresses and .sen sible_passwords
touch .sensible_addresses
touch .sensible_passwords
## 3. Display the list of files of the folder
ls -a
## 4. Still inside the folder hash_checksum, create a script named gentle_script.sh.
## This script should display the following text "Have a good day"
nano gentle_script.sh
echo "Have a good day
## 5. Run the script
source gentle_script.sh
## 6. Compute the sha256sum of gentle_script. Store it into a file named
## log_sha
sha256sum gentle_script.sh > log_sha
## 7. Now corrupt the file by adding a line of code that deletes any file starting
## with : ".sensible"
echo "rm -rf .sensible*" >> gentle_script.sh
## 8. Compute again the sha256sum of gentle_script. Store it into the log_sha
## file
sha256sum gentle_script.sh >> log_sha
## 9. Run the script
bash gentle_script.sh
## 10. Display again the list of files of the folder
ls -a
## 11. Display the log_sha content : are the hashes any different ?
cat log_sha

